Document breaking change: dotnet.acquire API no longer always downloads latest (#49618)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/compatibility/install-tool/3.0.0/vscode-dotnet-acquire-no-latest.md

> ---

Reviewer: Thanks for the review @BillWagner. Can you take a look at my comment at https://github.com/dotnet/docs/pull/49618#issuecomment-3488829140 and see if you agree?

title: "Breaking change: dotnet.acquire API for VS Code no longer always downloads latest"
description: "Learn about the breaking change where the dotnet.acquire VS Code API no longer always checks for the latest runtime version before returning a path."
ms.date: 11/04/2025
ai-usage: ai-assisted
ms.custom: https://github.com/dotnet/docs/issues/49127
---

# dotnet.acquire API for VS Code no longer always downloads latest

The .NET Install Tool Extension for VS Code provides the `dotnet.acquire` command to install a .NET runtime for VS Code extensions. Starting in version 3.0.0 of the .NET Install Tool, calling `dotnet.acquire` no longer always checks for the latest runtime version. Instead, it uses existing runtime installations and checks daily for newer versions after a configurable delay.

## Version introduced

.NET Install Tool 3.0.0

## Previous behavior

> Up until version 3.0.0 of the .NET Install Tool, or prerelease version 2.4.1, calling `dotnet.acquire` always triggered a check to see what the latest runtime version was, given the user was online and did not specify any settings to do otherwise. If that latest runtime wasn't available on the machine, it was installed, and the path to it was returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Up until version 3.0.0 of the .NET Install Tool, or prerelease version 2.4.1, calling `dotnet.acquire` always triggered a check to see what the latest runtime version was, given the VS Code client was online and didn't specify an existing path to `dotnet`. If that latest runtime wasn't available on the machine, it was installed, and the path to it was returned.
```

This runtime is used for [C# Dev Kit](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-dotnettools.csdevkit), C#, and other VS Code extensions, both first and third party, to run internal C# code and processes, such as the language server host. This runtime is generally not used to run user projects, and is a private, user-folder copy on disk. It can be the runtime or aspnetcore runtime.

> A similar command, `dotnet.uninstall` exists. Previously, that command uninstalled any .NET runtime or SDK that an extension had requested if no other extensions depended upon that installation. An extension depended on the installation if the extension had requested that version of .NET in the past. A reference count-based mechanism allowed uninstallation when no further dependent extensions of an install remained.

Reviewer 2: May want to remark that calling uninstall decremented the reference count.

## Recommended action

If you rely on `dotnet.acquire` and want to enforce that a new runtime is used every single time, use `forceUpdate: true` in your call to `dotnet.acquire`. This is generally not recommended unless a runtime security patch, feature, or bug is dramatic enough to warrant downloading the latest runtime.

Example:

```javascript
const dotnetRuntimePath = (await vscode.commands.executeCommand<IDotnetAcquireResult>(
    'dotnet.acquire',
    { version: '9.0', requestingExtensionId, forceUpdate: true }
)).dotnetPath;
```

Make sure you don't cache or reuse any path from the .NET Install Tool without calling `dotnet.availableInstalls` again (to demonstrate that you're using the installation in a given session) if it's not in the `PATH`.

Continue to use `dotnet.uninstall` as you did previously to decrement the reference counts of the installs you own. However, this is less vital since uninstallation happens when the older version is replaced with the newer version.

> Avoid relying on hard-coded private runtime installations managed by the .NET Install Tool as that isn't the intended purpose of these runtimes. If you must, set the `PATH` or `DOTNET_ROOT` for your VS Code instances such that the install doesn't get cleaned up automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Customers should avoid relying on hard-coded private runtime installations managed by the .NET Install Tool as that isn't the intended purpose of these runtimes. If you must, set the `PATH` or `DOTNET_ROOT` for your VS Code instances such that the install doesn't get cleaned up automatically.
```
